doc/user: alerting (#23426)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/manage/monitor/alerting.md

description: "Alerting thresholds to use for monitoring."
menu:
  main:
    parent: "monitor"
---

After setting up a monitoring tool, it is important to configure alert rules. Alert rules send a notification when a metric surpasses a threshold. This will help you prevent operational incidents.

This page describes which metrics and thresholds to build as a starting point. For more details on how to set up alert rules in Datadog or Grafana, refer to:

 * [Datadog monitors](https://docs.datadoghq.com/monitors/)
 * [Grafana alerts](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/fundamentals/)

## Thresholds

Alert rules tend to have two threshold levels, and we are going to define them as follows:
 * **Warning:** represents a call to attention to a symptom with high chances to develop into an issue.
 * **Alert:** represents an active issue that requires immediate action.

For each threshold level, use the following table as a guide to set up your own alert rules:

Metric | Warning | Alert | Description
-- | -- | -- | --
CPU | 85% | 100% | Average CPU usage for a cluster in the last *60 minutes*.
Memory | 80% | 90% | Average memory usage for a cluster in the last *30 minutes*.

> Status | - | On Change | Source status change in the last *5 minutes*.

Reviewer: Should we have a similar status change alert for cluster replicas too?

Distribution | Time spent by worker > Avg * 1.5 | Time spent by worker > Avg * 2 | Average [work distribution](https://materialize.com/docs/manage/troubleshooting/#is-work-distributed-equally-across-workers) in the last *60 minutes*.
Freshness | > 5s | > 1m | Average [lag behind an input](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/#mz_materialization_lag) in the last *30 minutes*.

### Custom Thresholds

For the following table, replace the two variables, _X_ and _Y_, by your organization and use case:

Metric | Warning | Alert | Description
-- | -- | -- | --

> Latency | p99 > X | p99 > Y | Latency percentile from the activity log in the last *30 minutes*. Where X and Y are the expected latencies in milliseconds.

Reviewer: What's the query powering this? Should we instruct users to monitor a filtered subset of query patterns (or target views) they care about?

Author: > What's the query powering this? 

@chuck-alt-delete made this query https://materializeinc.slack.com/archives/C0638BNE256/p1700027081349059?thread_ts=1700027001.256819&cid=C0638BNE256 that we could document. As an alternative, I can switch to the avg, max, min query. Anyways, I will research what's the most common insight for these cases.

> Should we instruct users to monitor a filtered subset of query patterns (or target views) they care about?

We should. I suggested a customer filter out `mz_introspection` and `mz_system`, and we could also suggest filtering `SELECT` statements. I feel this is more a part of the monitoring guides than alerting. If you agree, I will create an extra PR for a base query for this and cover any other missing queries not yet documented.

Reviewer: Good point. I do feel like like some filtering is necessary in order to set a useful alert threshold. Note in the linked query the common filter `where mpsh.redacted_sql ilike '%[view name]`. You might expect certain queries to take longer than others and wouldn't want to alert on false negatives using a universal latency ceiling.
>I feel this is more a part of the monitoring guides than alerting

Author: After researching and looking at our examples, I concluded to use the `avg` latency. We already have customers using it in production, and it is simpler to visualize.

Author: @ggnall after the discussion in Slack about how to detect `SELECT` statements I opted to avoid using filters until we have a more robust approach.

Freshness | > 5s | > 1m | Average [lag behind an input](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/#mz_materialization_lag) in the last *30 minutes*.

### Custom Thresholds

For the following table, replace the two variables, _X_ and _Y_, by your organization and use case:

Metric | Warning | Alert | Description
-- | -- | -- | --
Latency | Avg > X | Avg > Y | Average latency from `SELECT` statements in the last *30 minutes*. Where X and Y are the expected latencies in milliseconds.
Credits | Consumption rate increase by X% | Consumption rate increase by Y% | Average credit consumption in the last *30 minutes*.

## Maintenance window

Materialize has a [release and a maintenance window almost every week](https://materialize.com/docs/releases/) at a defined [schedule](https://materialize.com/docs/releases/#schedule). We announce every maintenance window on the [status page](https://status.materialize.com/), where you can subscribe to updates and receive alerts for this, or an unexpected incident at Materialize.

> After an upgrade, you’ll experience a few minutes of downtime and the rehydration process. Alerts may get trigger during this brief period of time. For this case, you can configure your moring tool to avoid unnecesary alerts as follows:

Reviewer 2: Small typoes:
```suggestion
After an upgrade, you’ll experience a few minutes of downtime and the rehydration process. Alerts may get triggered during this brief period of time. For this case, you can configure your monitoring tool to avoid unnecessary alerts as follows:
```
